---
title: 'Getting Started :rocket:'
date: 2024-07-20T22:37:14+05:30
draft: false
coverImg: "cover.webp"
weight: 1
summary: "This page contains installation instructions for both Hugo and Kayal, as well as instructions for future updates."
tags: ["hugo", "kayal", "install"]
---

## Install Hugo

- First Install Hugo, Simply follow the standard Hugo [Quick Start](https://gohugo.io/getting-started/quick-start/) procedure to get setup and running quickly.
- The theme is tested with Hugo v0.125 but may work with lower versions.
- Installation instructions for the theme are provided below, Instructions for updating are provided too.

## Getting Started

### Create a new Hugo site

Run the following command to create a new Hugo site in a directory named `mywebsite`.
```bash
hugo new site mywebsite
```
**Note:**
- You can name the project directory whatever you choose, but the instructions below assume it’s named `mywebsite`.
- If you use a different name, be sure to substitute it accordingly.
- Read more here about [Hugo Docs's - hugo new site command](https://gohugo.io/commands/hugo_new_site/#synopsis)

Once you've created a new site, follow the steps below to add the **Kayal** theme.

### Download Kayal

There several different ways to install the Kayal theme into your Hugo website. From easiest to most difficult to install and maintain, they are:

- Git submodule (Recommended)
- Hugo module
- Manual file copy

If unsure, choose the Git submodule method.

{{< collapse summary="<b>Install as Git submodule</b>" open=true >}}

This method is the quickest and easiest for keeping the theme up-to-date. Besides **Hugo** and **Go**, you'll also need to ensure you have **Git** installed on your local machine.

Change into the directory for your Hugo website (that you created above), initialise a new `git` repository and add Kayal as a submodule.

```bash
cd mywebsite
git init
git submodule add -b main https://github.com/mnjm/kayal.git themes/kayal
```

Then continue to [set up the theme configuration files](#set-up-theme-configuration-files).
{{< /collapse >}}

{{< collapse summary="<b>Install as Hugo Module</b>" >}}
For this method, use Hugo to manage your themes. Make sure you have **Go** installed before proceeding.

1. [Download](https://golang.org/dl/) and install Go. Verify with `go version` (requires Go version 1.12 or later).
2. From your Hugo project directory (that you created above), initialise modules for your website:

   ```shell
   # If you're managing your project on GitHub
   hugo mod init github.com/<username>/<repo-name>

   # If you're managing your project locally
   hugo mod init my-project
   ```

3. Add the theme to your configuration by creating a new file `config/_default/module.toml` and adding the following:

   ```toml
   [[imports]]
   path = "github.com/mnjm/kayal/"
   ```

4. Start your server using `hugo server` and the theme will be downloaded automatically.
5. Continue to [set up the theme configuration files](#set-up-theme-configuration-files).
{{< /collapse >}}

{{< collapse summary="<b>Install manually</b>" >}}

1. Download the latest release of the theme source code. Download [link](https://github.com/mnjm/kayal/releases/latest)
2. Extract the archive, rename the folder to `kayal` and move it to the `themes/` directory inside your Hugo project's root folder.
3. Continue to [set up the theme configuration files](#set-up-theme-configuration-files).
{{< /collapse >}}

### Set up theme configuration files

In the root folder of your website, delete the `hugo.toml` file that was generated by Hugo. Copy the `toml` config files from the theme into your `config/_default/` folder. This will ensure you have all the correct theme settings and will enable you to easily customize the theme to your needs.

{{< callout >}}
**Note:** You should not overwrite the `module.toml` file if one already exists in your project!
{{< /callout >}}

Depending on how you installed the theme you will find the theme config files in different places:

- **Hugo Modules:** In the Hugo cache directory, or [download a copy](https://download-directory.github.io/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fmnjm%2Fkayal%2Ftree%2Fmain%2Fconfig%2F_default) from GitHub.
- **Git submodule or Manual install:** `themes/kayal/config/_default/`

Once you've copied the files, your config folder should look like this:

```text
_default
├── hugo.toml
├── markup.toml
├── menus.toml
└── params.toml
```

{{< callout >}}
**Important:** If you didn't use Hugo Modules to install Kayal, you must add the line `theme = "kayal"` to the top of your `hugo.toml` file.
{{< /callout >}}

### Next steps

The basic Kayal installation is now complete. Continue to the [Configuration]({{< ref "configuration" >}}) section to learn more about configuring the theme.

---

## Installing updates

Periodically, new [releases](https://github.com/mnjm/kayal/releases) may include fixes and new features. Update theme files on your website based on your initial installation method.

{{< collapse summary="<b>Update using git</b>" open=true >}}

Git submodules can be updated using the `git` command. Simply execute the following command and the latest version of the theme will be downloaded into your local repository:

```shell
git submodule update --remote --merge
```

Once the submodule has been updated, rebuild your site and check everything works as expected.
{{< /collapse >}}

{{< collapse summary="Update using Hugo" >}}
Hugo makes updating modules super easy. Simply change into your project directory and execute the following command:

```shell
hugo mod get -u
```

Hugo will automatically update any modules that are required for your project. It does this by inspecting your `module.toml` and `go.mod` files. If you have any issues with the update, check to ensure these files are still configured correctly.

Then simply rebuild your site and check everything works as expected.
{{< /collapse >}}

{{< collapse summary="Update manually" >}}
Updating Kayal manually requires you to download the latest copy of the theme and replace the old version in your project.

**Note**: Any local customisations you have made to the theme files will be lost during this process.

1. Download the latest theme release [here](https://github.com/mnjm/kayal/releases/latest).
2. Extract and move `kayal` to `themes/` in your Hugo project.
3. Rebuild your site and check everything works as expected.
{{< /collapse >}}
